add stable diffusion blog (#474)
huggingface/blog: stable_diffusion_with_diffusers.md

    <a href="/valhalla">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/27137566?v=4" width="100" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>valhalla</code>
            <span class="fullname">Suraj Patil</span>
        </div>
    </a>
	 <a href="/pcuenq">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/1177582?v=4" width="100" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>pcuenq</code>
            <span class="fullname">Pedro Cuenca</span>
        </div>
    </a>
    <a href="/patrickvonplaten">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/23423619?v=4" width="100" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>patrickvonplaten</code>
            <span class="fullname">Patrick von Platen</span>
        </div>
    </a>
</div>

<a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/stable_diffusion.ipynb">
    <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
</a>

# **Stable Diffusion** 🎨 
*...using `D🧨ffusers`*

> Stable Diffusion is a text-to-image latent diffusion model created by the researchers and engineers from [CompVis](https://github.com/CompVis), [Stability AI](https://stability.ai/) and [LAION](https://laion.ai/). 

Reviewer: The link for `CompVis` probably should be to `https://ommer-lab.com/`, instead of to the GitHub repo.

Reviewer: In `CompVis/stable-diffusion` repo, it mentions [Runway](https://runwayml.com/):

> Stable Diffusion was made possible thanks to a collaboration with [Stability AI](https://stability.ai/) and [Runway](https://runwayml.com/) and builds upon our previous work:

Should we include it here too?

Reviewer 2: Good point. I'm not sure, maybe @apolinario or @patrickvonplaten can recommend something?

Reviewer 3: Leaving it out here for now - think mentioning that all three orgs have worked on it is credit enough :-)

**Stable Diffusion**

Stable Diffusion is a text-to-image latent diffusion model created by the researchers and engineers from [CompVis](https://github.com/CompVis), [Stability AI](https://stability.ai/) and [LAION](https://laion.ai/). It's trained on `512  × 512` images from a subset of the [LAION-5B](https://laion.ai/blog/laion-5b/) database. This model uses a frozen CLIP ViT-L/14 text encoder to condition the model on text prompts. With its 860M UNet and 123M text encoder, the model is relatively lightweight and runs on a GPU with at least 10GB VRAM.
 
See the [model card](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion) for more information.

Stable Diffusion has three core components:

1. An autoencoder which maps an image to a low-dimensional latent space, and the latent representation back to an image. In Stable Diffusion, the autoencoder is implemented in the `AutoencodeKL` model.
2. A text encoder model that converts text prompts to embeddings that can be passed as conditions to the UNet. In Stable Diffustion, the [CLIP model](https://openai.com/blog/clip/) is used for this purpose.

> 3. A UNet model trained to generate the low-dimentional latent space. Stable Diffusion uses cross-attention the the model blocks to condition on the text.

Reviewer: maybe just `cross-attention model blocks`?

Reviewer 2: I just replaced it with `cross-attention in the model blocks`.

---
title: Stable Diffusion with D🧨iffusers

> thumbnail: /blog/assets/78_annotated-diffusion/thumbnail.png

Reviewer 4: The thumbnail is over 2.5MB which will lead to a slow experience in the blog.

---

<h1>

> 	Stable Diffusion with D🧨iffusers

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	Stable Diffusion with 🧨 Diffusers
```

        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/1177582?v=4" width="100" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>pcuenq</code>
            <span class="fullname">Pedro Cuenca</span>
        </div>
    </a>
    <a href="/patrickvonplaten">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/23423619?v=4" width="100" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>patrickvonplaten</code>
            <span class="fullname">Patrick von Platen</span>
        </div>
    </a>
</div>

<a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/stable_diffusion.ipynb">
    <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
</a>

# **Stable Diffusion** 🎨 
*...using `D🧨ffusers`*

Stable Diffusion is a text-to-image latent diffusion model created by the researchers and engineers from [CompVis](https://github.com/CompVis), [Stability AI](https://stability.ai/) and [LAION](https://laion.ai/). 
It is trained on 512x512 images from a subset of the [LAION-5B](https://laion.ai/blog/laion-5b/) database.

> *LAION-5B* is the largest, freely accesible multi-model dataset that currently exists.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*LAION-5B* is the largest, freely accessible multi-modal dataset that currently exists.
```

Now, let's get started by generating some images 🎨.

## Running Stable Diffusion

First, you should install `diffusers==0.2.3` to run the following code snippets:

```bash
pip install diffusers==0.2.3
```

You also need to accept the model license before downloading or using the weights. In this post we'll use model version `v1-4`, so you'll need to  visit [its card](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4), read the license and tick the checkbox if you agree. You have to be a registered user in 🤗 Hugging Face Hub, and you'll also need to use an access token for the code to work. For more information on access tokens, please refer to [this section of the documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/security-tokens).

After that one-time setup out of the way, we can proceed with Stable Diffusion inference.

The Stable Diffusion model can be run in inference with just a couple of lines using the [`StableDiffusionPipeline`](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/pipelines/stable_diffusion/pipeline_stable_diffusion.py) pipeline. The pipeline sets up everything you need to generate images from text with 

> a simple `from_pretrained` function call.

Reviewer 4: Maybe we should mention that the token is required due  to the gated access/license accept

Reviewer 3: will adapt

```python

> from diffusers import StableDiffusionPipeline

Reviewer 4: This pipeline also expects transformers, so maybe let's add it in the pip install at the beginning

> # make sure you're logged in with `huggingface-cli login`
> pipe = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-3-diffusers", use_auth_token=True)

Reviewer 4: Given the login is not working at the moment, maybe let's have

```suggestion
# get your token at https://huggingface.co/settings/tokens
pipe = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4", use_auth_token=YOUR_TOKEN)
```

```

The result would look as follows

![png](assets/98_stable_diffusion_with_diffusers/stable_diffusion_with_diffusers_14_1.png)

If at some point you get a black image, it may be because the content filter built inside the model might have detected an NSFW result. If you believe this shouldn't be the case, try tweaking your prompt or using a different seed. In fact, the model predictions include information about whether NSFW was detected for a particular result. Let's see what they look like:

```python
result = pipe(prompt, guidance_scale=7)
print(result)
```

```json
{
    'sample': [<PIL.Image.Image image mode=RGB size=512x512>],
    'nsfw_content_detected': [False]
}
```

You can change the number of inference steps using the `num_inference_steps` argument. 
In general, results are better the more steps you use. 
Stable Diffusion works quite well with a relatively small number of steps, so we recommend to use the default number of inference steps of `50`. 
If you want faster results you can use a smaller number. If you want potentially higher quality results, 
you can use larger numbers.

Let's try out running the pipeline with less denoising steps.

```python

> import torch
> 
> generator = torch.Generator("cuda").manual_seed(1024)

Reviewer 4: Maybe this can be deleted as it was done already
```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: Think generator is stateful and advanced when creating random inputs, so let's better leave it here

For example, we'll show how to use Stable Diffusion with a different scheduler, namely [Katherine Crowson's](https://github.com/crowsonkb) K-LMS scheduler added in [this PR](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/pull/185).

The [pre-trained model](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4/tree/main) includes all the components required to setup a complete diffusion pipeline. They are stored in the following folders:
- `text_encoder`: Stable Diffusion uses CLIP, but other diffusion models may use other encoders such as `BERT`.
- `tokenizer`. It must match the one used by the `text_encoder` model.
- `scheduler`: The scheduling algorithm used to progressively add noise to the image during training.
- `unet`: The model used to generate the latent representation of the input.
- `vae`: Autoencoder module that we'll use to decode latent representations into real images.

We can load the components by referring to the folder they were saved, using the `subfolder` argument to `from_pretrained`.

```python

> from transformers import CLIPTextModel, CLIPTokenizer

Reviewer 4: Nit, I would change the use_auth_token=True to actually receive the token as `notebook_login` is broken

Reviewer 3: works on our colab though

latents = 1 / 0.18215 * latents
image = vae.decode(latents)
```

And finally, let's convert the image to PIL so we can display or save it.

```python
image = (image / 2 + 0.5).clamp(0, 1)
image = image.detach().cpu().permute(0, 2, 3, 1).numpy()
images = (image * 255).round().astype("uint8")
pil_images = [Image.fromarray(image) for image in images]
pil_images[0]
```

![png](assets/98_stable_diffusion_with_diffusers/stable_diffusion_with_diffusers_hal.png)

We've gone from the basic use of Stable Diffusion using 🤗 Hugging Face Diffusers to more advanced uses of the library, and we tried to introduce all the pieces in a modern diffusion system. If you liked this topic and want to learn more, we recommend the following resources:
- Our [Colab notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/stable_diffusion.ipynb).
- The [Getting Started with Diffusers](https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/diffusers_intro.ipynb) notebook, that gives a broader overview on Diffusion systems.
- The [Annotated Diffusion Model](https://huggingface.co/blog/annotated-diffusion) blog post.

> - Our [code in GitHub](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers).

Reviewer 4: Maybe ask to leave a :star:

> - Our [code in GitHub](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Our [code in GitHub](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers) where we'd be more than happy if you leave a ⭐ if `diffusers` is useful to you!
```

    <a href="/valhalla">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/27137566?v=4" width="100" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>valhalla</code>
            <span class="fullname">Suraj Patil</span>
        </div>
    </a>
    <a href="/pcuenq">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/1177582?v=4" width="100" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>pcuenq</code>
            <span class="fullname">Pedro Cuenca</span>
        </div>
    </a>
    <a href="/patrickvonplaten">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/23423619?v=4" width="100" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>patrickvonplaten</code>
            <span class="fullname">Patrick von Platen</span>
        </div>
    </a>
    
</div>

<a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/stable_diffusion.ipynb">
    <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
</a>

# **Stable Diffusion** 🎨 
*...using `🧨diffusers`*

> Stable Diffusion is a text-to-image latent diffusion model created by the researchers and engineers from [CompVis](https://github.com/CompVis), [Stability AI](https://stability.ai/) and [LAION](https://laion.ai/). It's trained on 512x512 images from a subset of the [LAION-5B](https://laion.ai/blog/laion-5b/) database. This model uses a frozen CLIP ViT-L/14 text encoder to condition the model on text prompts. With its 860M UNet and 123M text encoder, the model is relatively lightweight and runs on a GPU with at least 10GB VRAM.

Reviewer 5: suggestion: add brief description of LAION, e.g. "the largest, public multi-model dataset"

> Stable Diffusion is a text-to-image latent diffusion model created by the researchers and engineers from [CompVis](https://github.com/CompVis), [Stability AI](https://stability.ai/) and [LAION](https://laion.ai/). It's trained on 512x512 images from a subset of the [LAION-5B](https://laion.ai/blog/laion-5b/) database. This model uses a frozen CLIP ViT-L/14 text encoder to condition the model on text prompts. With its 860M UNet and 123M text encoder, the model is relatively lightweight and runs on a GPU with at least 10GB VRAM.

Reviewer 5: I would actually suggest having one sentence saying something like "Stable Diffusion is an open-source alternative to DALLE-2 that is reshaping the accessibility of photorealistic text-to-image generation. Specifically, Stable Diffusion is ..."

I think starting with code can be a bit too direct, aiming at an audience bigger than just those who have heard of Stable Diffusion.

> Stable Diffusion is a text-to-image latent diffusion model created by the researchers and engineers from [CompVis](https://github.com/CompVis), [Stability AI](https://stability.ai/) and [LAION](https://laion.ai/). It's trained on 512x512 images from a subset of the [LAION-5B](https://laion.ai/blog/laion-5b/) database. This model uses a frozen CLIP ViT-L/14 text encoder to condition the model on text prompts. With its 860M UNet and 123M text encoder, the model is relatively lightweight and runs on a GPU with at least 10GB VRAM.

Reviewer 2: Cool, I think that a brief introduction makes sense, but in my opinion it shouldn't be too technical. The blog post is derived from the colab notebook, so it implicitly has code users in mind. But I agree that we should aim to make it readable to a broader audience.

Perhaps we can link to the [Annotated Diffusion](https://huggingface.co/blog/annotated-diffusion) blog post in the initial paragraphs, just as we link to the colab. For a hands-on experience, refer to the colab; for technical details go to section X in this post, and for a broad vision of diffusion go to the annotated diffusion post.

> Stable Diffusion is a text-to-image latent diffusion model created by the researchers and engineers from [CompVis](https://github.com/CompVis), [Stability AI](https://stability.ai/) and [LAION](https://laion.ai/). It's trained on 512x512 images from a subset of the [LAION-5B](https://laion.ai/blog/laion-5b/) database. This model uses a frozen CLIP ViT-L/14 text encoder to condition the model on text prompts. With its 860M UNet and 123M text encoder, the model is relatively lightweight and runs on a GPU with at least 10GB VRAM.

Reviewer 3: Good feedback, I also think this paragraph should be made easier to read - will adapt!

See the [model card](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion) for more information.

> **The Stable Diffusion weights are currently only available to universities, academics, research institutions and independent researchers. Please request access applying to <a href="https://stability.ai/academia-access-form" target="_blank">this</a> form**

Reviewer 5: Should we briefly say "due to harmful content" or something correct here?

This Colab notebook shows how to use Stable Diffusion with the 🤗 Hugging Face [D🧨ffusers library](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers). 

Let's get started!

## 1. How to use `StableDiffusionPipeline`

First, you'll see how to run text to image inference in just a few lines of code! 

### Setup

First, please make sure you are using a GPU runtime to run this notebook, so inference is much faster. If the following command fails, use the `Runtime` menu above and select `Change runtime type`.

```python
!nvidia-smi
```

Let's install the required dependacies.

```python
!pip install diffusers==0.2.2
!pip install transformers scipy ftfy
```

In order to use Stable Diffusion, you need to have access to the pre-trained weights. You can request access for research purposes using the form in [the model card](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion). Run the following cell to authenticate against the 🤗 Hugging Face Hub once you get access.

If you don't have access yet, public weights are expected to be released in a few days, so check back soon!

```python
from huggingface_hub import notebook_login

notebook_login()
```

> ### StableDiffusionPipeline

Reviewer 2: That snippet almost calls for a more visual Carbon version instead:
![diffusers](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1177582/185353891-a6f62292-247f-422b-8c20-ff68d178e6a3.png)

> `StableDiffusionPipeline` is an end-to-end inference pipeline that you can use to generate images from text with just a few lines of code.

Reviewer 5: This matches a little closely with the description of Stable Diffusion as a whole, can we make it more specific to the code we are building?

> `StableDiffusionPipeline` is an end-to-end inference pipeline that contains all the needed components you can use to generate images from text with just a few lines of code.

I'm not 100% sure of this one.

```python
import torch

generator = torch.Generator("cuda").manual_seed(1024)

with autocast("cuda"):
  image = pipe(prompt, guidance_scale=7, generator=generator)["sample"][0]

image
```

![png](assets/98_stable_diffusion_with_diffusers/stable_diffusion_with_diffusers_14_1.png)
    

You can change the number of inference steps using the `num_inference_steps` argument. In general, results are better the more steps you use. Stable Diffusion, being one of the latest models, works great with a relatively small number of steps, so we recommend to use the default of `50`. If you want faster results you can use a smaller number.

The following cell uses the same seed as before, but with fewer steps. Note how some details, such as the horse's head or the helmet, are less defined than in the previous image:

```python
import torch

generator = torch.Generator("cuda").manual_seed(1024)

with autocast("cuda"):
  image = pipe(prompt, guidance_scale=7, num_inference_steps=20, generator=generator)["sample"][0]

image
```

![png](assets/98_stable_diffusion_with_diffusers/stable_diffusion_with_diffusers_16_1.png)
    

> The other parameter in the pipeline call is `guidance_scale`. It is a way to increase the adherence to the conditional signal which in this case is text as well as overall sample quality. In simple terms classifier free guidance forces the generation to better match with the prompt. Numbers like `7` or `8.5` give good results, if you use a very large number the images might look good, but will be less diverse. 

Reviewer 5: Reading tis would leave me kind of confused. Any insight onto why 7 or 8 works well? How is this conditioning?

> The other parameter in the pipeline call is `guidance_scale`. It is a way to increase the adherence to the conditional signal which in this case is text as well as overall sample quality. In simple terms classifier free guidance forces the generation to better match with the prompt. Numbers like `7` or `8.5` give good results, if you use a very large number the images might look good, but will be less diverse. 

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I don't know how to explain it because I don't know why that range works. Maybe we should just say "Numbers below `10` are usually good choices, larger ones may produce good-looking images, but they will be less diverse.". Any ideas?

all_images = []
for i in range(num_rows):
  with autocast("cuda"):
    images = pipe(prompt, guidance_scale=7.5)["sample"]
  all_images.extend(images)

grid = image_grid(all_images, rows=num_rows, cols=num_cols)
grid
```

    
![png](assets/98_stable_diffusion_with_diffusers/stable_diffusion_with_diffusers_24_4.png)
    

### Generate non-square images

Stable Diffusion produces images of `512 × 512` pixels by default. But it's very easy to override the default using the `height` and `width` arguments, so you can create rectangular images in portrait or landscape ratios.

These are some recommendations to choose good image sizes:
- Make sure `height` and `width` are both multiples of `8`.
- Going below 512 might result in lower quality images.
- Going over 512 in both directions will repeat image areas (global coherence is lost).
- The best way to create non-square images is to use `512` in one dimension, and a value larger than that in the other one.

```python
prompt = "a photograph of an astronaut riding a horse"
with autocast("cuda"):
  image = pipe(prompt, height=512, width=768, guidance_scale=7.5)["sample"][0]
image
```

> ![png](assets/98_stable_diffusion_with_diffusers/stable_diffusion_with_diffusers_26_1.png)

Reviewer 2: lol, this came out worse than in our previous tests. Maybe replace with something else? I'll propose something if I have time later.

Reviewer 3: Replacing all the images

    

## 2. What is Stable Diffusion

Next, we go a bit more in-detail about how ***Stable diffusion*** works.

> Diffusion models are machine learning systems that are trained to *denoise* random gaussian noise step by step, to get to a sample of interest, such as an *image*. For a more detailed overview of how they work, check [this colab](https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/diffusers_intro.ipynb).

Reviewer 5: Gaussian *

> Stable Diffusion is based on a particular type of diffusion model called **Latent Diffusion**, proposed in [High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models](https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752). This section takes a look at how Latent Diffusion works.

Reviewer 5: This sentence is a tough transition without hinting on what Latent Diffusion fixes. 

> This section takes a look at how Latent Diffusion works to overcome an engineering limitation of diffusion models.

> Diffusion models have shown to achieve state-of-the-art results for generating image data. But one downside of diffusion models is that the reverse denoising process is slow. In addition, these models consume a lot of memory because they operate in pixel space, which becomes huge when generating high-resolution images. Therefore, it is challenging to train these models and also use them for inference.

Reviewer 5: Can remove this sentence imo
> Diffusion models have shown to achieve state-of-the-art results for generating image data.

Lead with, "the reverse denoising process of diffusion models is slow because of its repeated, sequential nature (rather than parallel)."

<br>

Latent diffusion can reduce the memory and compute complexity by applying the diffusion process over a lower dimensional _latent_ space, instead of using the actual pixel space. This is the key difference between standard diffusion and latent diffusion models: **in latent diffusion the model is trained to generate latent (compressed) representations of the images.** 

There are two main components in latent diffusion.

1. An autoencoder (VAE).
2. A [UNet network](https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/diffusers_intro.ipynb#scrollTo=wW8o1Wp0zRkq) that combines the encoder and decoder layers of the autoencoder. 

> **The autoencoder (VAE)**

Reviewer 5: The Variational Autoencoder (VAE)

if you are going to use the acronym (fix above too)

The VAE model has two parts, an encoder and a decoder. The encoder is used to convert the image into a low dimensional latent representation. The decoder, conversely, transforms the latent representation back into an image. During latent diffusion _training_, the encoder is used to get the latent representations (_latents_) of the images for the forward diffusion process, which applies more and more noise at each step. During _inference_, the latents generated by the reverse diffusion process are converted back into images using the VAE decoder.

**Why is latent diffusion fast and efficient?**

Since latent diffusion operates on a low dimensional space, it greatly reduces the memory and compute requirements compared to pixel-space diffusion models. For example, the autoencoder used in Stable Diffusion has a reduction factor of 8. This means that an image of shape `(3, 512, 512)` becomes `(3, 64, 64)` in latent space, which requires `8 × 8 = 64` times less memory.

This is why it's possible to generate `512 × 512` images so quickly, even on 16GB Colab GPUs!

**Stable Diffusion**

> Stable Diffusion is a text-conditioned latent diffusion model trained on the [LAION dataset](https://laion.ai).

Reviewer 2: Use now the paragraphs we removed from the intro:

```suggestion
Stable Diffusion is a text-to-image latent diffusion model created by the researchers and engineers from [CompVis](https://github.com/CompVis), [Stability AI](https://stability.ai/) and [LAION](https://laion.ai/). It's trained on `512  × 512` images from a subset of the [LAION-5B](https://laion.ai/blog/laion-5b/) database. This model uses a frozen CLIP ViT-L/14 text encoder to condition the model on text prompts. With its 860M UNet and 123M text encoder, the model is relatively lightweight and runs on a GPU with at least 10GB VRAM.
 
See the [model card](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion) for more information.
```

Stable Diffusion has three core components:

1. An autoencoder which maps an image to a low-dimensional latent space, and the latent representation back to an image. In Stable Diffusion, the autoencoder is implemented in the `AutoencodeKL` model.
2. A text encoder model that converts text prompts to embeddings that can be passed as conditions to the UNet. In Stable Diffustion, the [CLIP model](https://openai.com/blog/clip/) is used for this purpose.
3. A UNet model trained to generate the low-dimentional latent space. Stable Diffusion uses cross-attention the the model blocks to condition on the text.

This is how the stable (latent) diffusion inference looks like:

<p align="center">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/patrickvonplaten/scientific_images/master/stable_diffusion.png" alt="sd-pipeline" width="500"/>
</p>

After this brief introduction to Latent and Stable Diffusion, let's see how to make advanced use of 🤗 Hugging Face Diffusers!

## 3. How to write your own inference pipeline with `diffusers`

Finally, we show how you can create custom diffusion pipelines with `diffusers`.

> This is often very useful to dig a bit deeper into certain functionalities of the system and to potentially switch out certain components. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is often very useful to dig a bit deeper into certain functionalities of the system and to potentially switch out some of the components.
```

> In this section, we will demonstrate how to use Stable Diffusion with a different scheduler, namely [Katherine Crowson's](https://github.com/crowsonkb) K-LMS scheduler that was added in [this PR](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/pull/185#pullrequestreview-1074247365).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, we'll show how to use Stable Diffusion with a different scheduler, namely [Katherine Crowson's](https://github.com/crowsonkb) K-LMS scheduler that was added in [this PR](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/pull/185).
```

> Let's go through the `StableDiffusionPipeline` step by step to see how we could have written it ourselves.

Reviewer 2: The motivation we established was to change the scheduler, I think that's enough.

```suggestion
```

```python
from transformers import CLIPTextModel, CLIPTokenizer
from diffusers import AutoencoderKL, UNet2DConditionModel, PNDMScheduler

# 1. Load the autoencoder model which will be used to decode the latents into image space. 
vae = AutoencoderKL.from_pretrained("CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-3-diffusers", subfolder="vae", use_auth_token=True)

# 2. Load the tokenizer and text encoder to tokenize and encode the text. 
tokenizer = CLIPTokenizer.from_pretrained("openai/clip-vit-large-patch14")
text_encoder = CLIPTextModel.from_pretrained("openai/clip-vit-large-patch14")

# 3. The UNet model for generating the latents.
unet = UNet2DConditionModel.from_pretrained("CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-3-diffusers", subfolder="unet", use_auth_token=True)
```

Now instead of loading the pre-defined scheduler, we load a K-LMS scheduler instead.

```python
from diffusers import LMSDiscreteScheduler

scheduler = LMSDiscreteScheduler(beta_start=0.00085, beta_end=0.012, beta_schedule="scaled_linear", num_train_timesteps=1000)
```

Next we move the models to the GPU.

```python

> %%capture

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

text_embeddings = text_encoder(text_input.input_ids.to(torch_device))[0]
```

We'll also get the unconditional text embeddings for classifier-free guidance, which are just the embeddings for the padding token (empty text). They need to have the same shape as the conditional `text_embeddings` (`batch_size` and `seq_length`)

```python
max_length = text_input.input_ids.shape[-1]
uncond_input = tokenizer(
    [""] * batch_size, padding="max_length", max_length=max_length, return_tensors="pt"
)
uncond_embeddings = text_encoder(uncond_input.input_ids.to(torch_device))[0]   
```

For classifier-free guidance, we need to do two forward passes. One with the conditioned input (`text_embeddings`), and another with the unconditional embeddings (`uncond_embeddings`). In practice, we can concatenate both into a single batch to avoid doing two forward passes.

```python
text_embeddings = torch.cat([uncond_embeddings, text_embeddings])
```

Generate the intial random noise.

```python
latents = torch.randn(
    (batch_size, unet.in_channels, height // 8, width // 8),
    generator=generator,
)
latents = latents.to(torch_device)
```

> ```python
> latents.shape
> ```
> 
> 
> 
> 
>     torch.Size([1, 4, 64, 64])
> 
> 
> 
> Cool $64 \times 64$ is expected. The model will transform this latent representation (pure noise) into a `512 × 512` image later on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we examine the `latents` at this stage we'll see their shape is `torch.Size([1, 4, 64, 64])`, much smaller than the image we want to generate. The model will transform this latent representation (pure noise) into a `512 × 512` image later on.
```

    torch.Size([1, 4, 64, 64])

Cool $64 \times 64$ is expected. The model will transform this latent representation (pure noise) into a `512 × 512` image later on.
```

    latent_model_input = torch.cat([latents] * 2)
    sigma = scheduler.sigmas[i]
    latent_model_input = latent_model_input / ((sigma**2 + 1) ** 0.5)

    # predict the noise residual
    with torch.no_grad():
      noise_pred = unet(latent_model_input, t, encoder_hidden_states=text_embeddings)["sample"]

    # perform guidance
    noise_pred_uncond, noise_pred_text = noise_pred.chunk(2)
    noise_pred = noise_pred_uncond + guidance_scale * (noise_pred_text - noise_pred_uncond)

    # compute the previous noisy sample x_t -> x_t-1
    latents = scheduler.step(noise_pred, i, latents)["prev_sample"]
```

We now use the `vae` to decode the generated `latents` back into the image.

```python
# scale and decode the image latents with vae
latents = 1 / 0.18215 * latents
image = vae.decode(latents)
```

And finally, let's convert the image to PIL so we can display or save it.

```python
image = (image / 2 + 0.5).clamp(0, 1)
image = image.detach().cpu().permute(0, 2, 3, 1).numpy()
images = (image * 255).round().astype("uint8")
pil_images = [Image.fromarray(image) for image in images]
pil_images[0]

> ```

Reviewer 2: Let's show a final image here.

Reviewer 2: Also, something to wrap up, like:

We've gone from the basic use of Stable Diffusion using 🤗 Hugging Face Diffusers to more advanced uses of the library, and we tried to introduce all the pieces in a modern diffusion system. If you liked this topic and want to learn more, we recommend the following resources:
- Our [Colab notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/stable_diffusion.ipynb).
- The [Getting Started with Diffusers](https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/diffusers_intro.ipynb) notebook, that gives a broader overview on Diffusion systems.
- The [Annotated Diffusion Model](https://huggingface.co/blog/annotated-diffusion) blog post.
- Our [code in GitHub](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers).

We hope you enjoyed it!
